# Report-A-Hoo_WhistleblowerApp

mmary

	Overall, my experience as a scrum master was very different from other group projects. I was able to see my team and myself grow as the semester progressed. The beginning of the project was shaky as no one knew the skills they needed to develop a website, and they didn’t necessarily know how to work with others on a larger-scale project like this one. There were also challenges of course with technical issues, communication barriers, and overall teamwork, but we managed to get through it as a team. Towards the end of the project, everyone was proficient enough in web development to take care of the features assigned to them and were able to communicate effectively with one another if a problem arose. As a scrum master, I developed leadership skills that helped me keep my team on track while learning how to prioritize tasks that would lead to the success of my group. I also was able to develop more confidence in my ability to contribute to a greater project without the fear of getting something wrong or implementing something incorrectly. All in all, my team was solid and worked together towards a common goal of completing this project. We all made some mistakes at some point but collectively fixed any issues that came about. As for recommendations for next semester’s teams, I recommend emphasizing the importance of communication upfront. Without it, teams aren’t teams and won’t be able to perform as a group but rather as individuals. This is severely less effective when problems arise or help is needed.
	

Report

Beginning to End Sprint Experience

	Software development is a process that requires more teamwork than many students might think. This is why my team started shaky at the start. But through working together and experimenting with how we wanted to proceed, we figured out a definitive way that we liked to work. There were many bumps along the way which I will go into more detail about but as a scrum master, I found ways to mitigate their effects and make working together in this class and as students with other priorities easier. 
	
	At the beginning of this project, my team was very new to development with Django and developing within a team. We had team members who were very proficient in working with frameworks for web development and others who were new to the concept. However, almost everyone was new to working with others on a larger-scale application like the one we were tasked with creating. So, as the scrum master, I really wanted to pool everyone together and be a leader who understood what we needed to accomplish. However, there were already a couple of hiccups at the start. I noticed that communication or alerts I had sent out were slow to reach people and responses were also slow to get back to me. I assumed that this was because some people weren’t used to checking Discord often or simply were busy with other classes. This was one of the first issues I quickly noticed. Students were of course busy with other things besides just this one class: extracurriculars, other homework, and social lives. I had to realize that this was just one of the factors that I had to accept as our team is comprised of students. I am sure other team leaders in the industry also have to balance the many projects that their subordinates are a part of. Moreover, one of our group members was in the middle of switching classes and didn’t even know if they were going to be joining our team. Thankfully, that issue was resolved within the first sprint as the student joined our discord group and repo, and I gave a brief recap of what the team had accomplished so far. I thought this was an interesting similarity to perhaps situations in the workforce where new hires are quickly caught up to speed so the rest of the group doesn’t lag behind. At this point, the team didn’t really know each other yet, so no major issues arose. 

	Moving onto the second sprint, this is where timing group meetings became a bit difficult. I decided to use When2Meet so we could all put down our availabilities so that we could begin requirements gathering and project ideation. However, getting everyone to fill out the When2Meet quickly was a bit difficult. Not everyone checked their Discord messages, so mentioning them (with the @ sign) helped to notify those who didn’t have general notifications on. This trick continued to prove useful throughout the rest of the project. The team worked pretty well together throughout the project ideation process, and I tried to send out a summary of the meeting at the end so we wouldn’t forget what was discussed and even action items for certain individuals. Many gave their ideas and suggestions but we eventually agreed on the instructor-reporting idea we had. However, our original idea was to have students report instructors, but the report itself would be going to the instructor instead of another authority. This problem will come up during the later sprints. During this sprint too, I noticed that those who were directly responsible for certain documents (like the requirements manager in this sprint) tended to be more responsible or diligent about communicating their needs or delegating tasks to others. I assume this is because of the grade or motivation tied to the document that they must submit. The team also was very supportive of one another I believe due to the less stressful workload they had at the start of the semester.

	Moving onto the third, actual coding was a part of this sprint with Heroku and Google Login. Since we had a DevOps role, I assigned them the task of getting Heroku and Google Login sorted out. However, I realized that this individual was harder to track down and communicate with since they didn’t spend a lot of time on Discord. They also preferred to work closer to the end of the sprint, so I tried helping them with the code assuming that they were struggling with the technicality of the features. But by the end of the sprint, I realized that I could trust those whom I assign features with to complete them by the end of the sprint. They might work closer to the due date when I would rather start early, but I quickly realized that this was simply a difference in how people work. For me as the scrum master, I also stayed on top of what the features that needed to be implemented really were and the exact requirements, so that those who were implementing understood.  I also implemented a basic submission feature, but one of my groupmates did as well. However, neither of us informed the rest of the group that we were also working on it, and he ended up deleting his whole branch since it was unused. Thus, this was another example of needing to communicate effectively, so that work wouldn’t be wasted. Therefore, it was predominantly the DevOps Manager and myself working on the sprint. Other team members were open to helping but probably didn’t find the need to since it seemed that we had the features handled. By the end of the sprint, I did notice that the DevOps manager did significantly more work than other team members, so I wanted to keep that in mind for future sprints.

	As for sprint four, this was the first time we were going to work on project features besides the minimum requirements. I asked the team what their preference was for assignments and they decided it’d be easier if I simply assigned people to each feature. I also introduced the idea of pair programming as some were more proficient in Django and Python than others. So, I assigned pairs and features for each pair. However, this idea didn’t work as communication was difficult between pairs, and it ended up being solo programming in the end. I tried to get pairs on schedule by having them meet, but I don’t think the meeting between pairs helped keep them on track. As for technical problems, some members didn’t have as much experience using git or software development in general, so there were issues with branching and keeping consistent commits. Working on time was an issue for this sprint too. Prerequisite features needed to be finished before the Amazon S3 storage, but they were finished a day or two before the deadline for S3, forcing the student assigned to S3 to work almost overtime (in a sense) on the last day. I recognized this as a problem and made sure to communicate that to the entire team. We also met problems with our requirements that I previewed earlier. With the reports going to the instructors, our project became a feedback app rather than whistleblowing, so we held an emergency meeting with Professor Elbaum to fix our requirements before continuing our implementation. Almost everyone who could show up came to the meeting which was great to see as it showed that we all wanted this project to succeed. This meeting was similar to meeting with important stakeholders to ensure that requirements were being implemented correctly and to their specifications. Thankfully, we didn’t have a lot implemented yet, so our work mainly lay within changing our GitHub Issues. Lastly, we encountered problems understanding the differences between certain roles (Django admin & site admin), but this was also cleared up through communication with the rest of the team. 

	With sprints five and six, we got into a good working process. After the end of a sprint meeting, I would assign features and everyone would take a look and ask any questions they might’ve had about their features. If anyone had any questions, they could mention (@) someone who probably knew how to help, and the problem could be resolved relatively quickly. Most people also started on their features earlier on which helped if there were features that were prerequisites for other features. Everyone was working alone and could be trusted to finish their features before the end of the sprint. However, since everyone was working so diligently, we had some problems with merge conflicts and testing code before merging. I also believe this is due to the differences in experience everyone has, but I think it was a good learning moment for everyone. Sometimes, it was still difficult to reach members whether that be because they were traveling or completing other assignments, but everything was still finished on time by the end of the sprints. However, during these stages, I think this was the smoothest our team worked. Team members understood each other and what they needed to get done. Everyone was pretty proficient in Django and Python, so the only questions members had were about other features people had previously implemented. Overall, these last sprints were peak efficiency for the team.

	Lastly, with each sprint, I would try to conduct a mini-sprint retrospective. This was particularly helpful during the earlier sprints as I could adapt my plans to how the team preferred to work. Leading into the later sprints, I didn’t have to conduct any retrospectives really or there wouldn’t be anything to reflect on. Everyone knew what to do and how our team worked.


Team Reflection/Dynamics

	As for interpersonal challenges, they were little to none. Everyone was quite respectful even if some were hard to contact sometimes. The team overall did a great job learning, adapting, and understanding how to work with one another. It was bumpy at the start with different levels of software development experience, but everyone caught up to speed in terms of technical skills and teamwork. It was also interesting to see that some would become an unofficial owner of certain features or aspects of the project. Anyone with a question about a certain aspect of the software would go to the person who had last worked on it or those who had the most commits for that functionality.  Likewise, I believe that this team likes to work by themselves a lot more than with others. This was proven by the failure of the pair programming idea I had tried earlier on. Many of the team members thought that this idea would work, but it ended up falling through as some simply preferred working alone or were harder to get a hold of. Thus, I took that information and tried to assign features that could be completed solely by one person. 
	


Scrum Master and Personal Reflection

	Specifically in my role as scrum master, I think I’ve learned a lot about how to manage people within a team and also the flow of a project. Since it was difficult to manage people, it was harder to manage the project. But, I realize that I couldn’t have done the entire project by myself. I needed to rely on others to pick up features to implement and help one another when I was not there. Communication as a leader also had to be consistent and strong so that people understood what needed to get done and when. It was also important so that everyone stayed on the same page since the scrum master was the main pillar of the group. The project itself also had to move along with my help. I had to determine which features were most important to work on first. These tended to be requirements for the sprint but probably (in a real-world context) are requirements that the stakeholder really wants first and foremost. On the more negative side, being a leader definitely had more responsibility and stress that came with the role. I felt as though I was the owner of this product and that the project would reflect my ability to lead a team. Being a programmer while leading was interesting too since I felt that I could assign myself features that were difficult or easy depending on what my workload was for those two weeks.

	Diving into my experiences with implementation, I think I really grew as a contributor of code. In the beginning, I was very careful with what I was merging into main and always wanted someone to check over my code because I was not confident in my abilities. While code checks are pretty standard in the industry, I think it could’ve slowed this project’s development because it took twice as long (someone coding and then someone checking over the code). Thus, I had to learn to be confident in my ability to contribute and trust that I could fix a bug if I ever committed one. Likewise, I had to learn to be resourceful by using external websites. This was particularly important because implementing with just the knowledge learned from class would not have been enough to complete this project. I believe that my group members probably concluded the same thing. Overall, I’m very happy with the progress I’ve made personally as a leader and a contributor.


Recommendations for Future Teams

In terms of next semester’s teams, I would recommend that everyone is more communicative with one another. I think this is one of the key things that make a team work. Whenever someone finishes a feature, let everyone else know so they can pull it just in case they forget. Whenever someone has a question, don’t be afraid to ask those with maybe more experience. Whenever someone isn’t available to do something for whatever reason, be sure to say that to the team so they know if they need to pick up extra work. To combat bad communication, maybe setting up a text message group would be better as it is more accessible. My group only used Discord but not everyone is always on Discord. Likewise, I think being cognizant of others’ work is important. With our group, we had a situation where a prerequisite feature was finished very late into the sprint, and the feature dependent on it was implemented very close to the end of the sprint. This made the programmer’s life much harder since they had to finish within a day rather than within a week or two. And lastly, I have a recommendation for future scrum masters. I believe that it is your job and responsibility to take control of the group if needed. Without a common goal, it is really hard for a team to work towards it, and it is up to the scrum master to give them that push. The scrum master has to run the team, assign tasks, and give due dates especially if people don’t self-assign work. However, the role is quite rewarding as the scrum master has the power to control their group and play with team dynamics so that the project has the highest probability of succeeding.
